.\" Manpage for ghostshell.
.TH GHOSTSHELL 1 "2026-06-11" "ghostshell 1.0.43" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ghostshell \- record and replay Linux terminal sessions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ghostshell rec
.RB [ \-q ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR file ]
.RI [ command
.RI [ args ...]]
.br
.B ghostshell play
.RB [ \-\-speed
.IR N ]
.RB [ \-\-idle
.IR N ]
.IR file | id
.br
.B ghostshell ls
.RB [ \-\-all "] [" \-\-user
.IR name ]
.br
.B ghostshell tail
.RB [ \-n
.IR N "] [" \-f ]
.I sessionid
.br
.B ghostshell tree
.br
.B ghostshell search
.RB [ \-\-from
.IR T ]
.RB [ \-\-to
.IR T ]
.RB [ \-\-user
.IR U ]
.RB [ \-i ]
.RB [ \-\-all ]
.RI [ pattern ]
.br
.B ghostshell export
.RB [ \-o
.IR file ]
.I sessionid
.br
.B ghostshell prune
.RB [ \-\-yes ]
.br
.B ghostshell backup
.br
.B ghostshell ansible list
.RB [ \-\-user
.IR U ]
.br
.B ghostshell ansible show
.RB [ \-\-user
.IR U ]
.I runid
.br
.B ghostshell init
.RB [ \-\-reset\-password | \-\-clear\-password ]
.br
.B ghostshell completion bash
.br
.B ghostshell version
.br
.B ghostshell \-\-check
.br
.B ghostshell help
.RI [ command ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ghostshell
records an interactive terminal session and replays it later.
It launches a command (a shell by default) inside a pseudo-terminal
(PTY), forwards your keystrokes to it, and copies everything the
program prints to both your screen and a recording file. The recording
can then be replayed with original timing.
.PP
It is a single self-contained binary, comparable to
.BR script (1)
or
.BR asciinema (1),
and writes the widely supported
.B asciinema v2
"cast" format, so recordings also play with
.B asciinema play
when that tool is installed.
.PP
.B ghostshell
records terminal
.I output
only; it does not store your keystrokes. With the optional
.B ghostshell-daemon
daemon and login hook (installed by the packages), sessions from all users are
collected into a root-only central store for audit (see
.BR "AUDIT COMMANDS" ).
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B rec \fR(alias: \fBrecord\fR)
Record a session. Runs
.I command
under a PTY; with no
.IR command ,
runs the user's login shell (see
.BR ENVIRONMENT ).
Recording stops when the command exits (type
.B exit
or press Ctrl-D in a shell). The output file path is printed on exit.
.TP
.B play
Replay a recorded
.I file
to the current terminal, reproducing the original inter-event timing.
.TP
.B ls \fR(alias: \fBlist\fR)
List recordings in the store directory, showing file name, start time,
and the recorded command.
.TP
.BI "help " "[command]"
With no argument, print a short usage summary (same as
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help ).
With a command name, print that command's detailed help. Equivalently,
.BI "ghostshell " "command"
.B \-\-help
(or
.BR help )
shows the command's help.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS rec options
.TP
.BI \-o " file"
Write the recording to
.IR file .
By default a file is auto-named in the store directory (see
.BR FILES ).
Implies local recording (bypasses the daemon).
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet: suppress the recording banner and the saved-path message. Also enabled
by setting
.BR GHOSTSHELL_QUIET=1 .
.SS play options
.TP
.BI \-\-speed " N"
Playback speed multiplier. Default
.BR 1.0 .
Values above 1 play faster (e.g.
.B 2.0
is twice as fast); values below 1 play slower. Must be greater than 0.
.TP
.BI \-\-idle " N"
Cap idle gaps between events to at most
.I N
seconds. Default
.B 0
means
.B exact original timing
\(em idle/wait periods are reproduced in full, so playback is a faithful
real-time replay (like a video). Set
.I N
> 0 to compress long pauses for quick review.
.SS Interactive replay controls
When
.B play
or
.B play-user
replays to a terminal, it opens a full-screen player on the alternate screen:
the recording renders above a persistent thin-line transport bar showing
position, time, and speed. At the end it holds on the final frame until you
quit. A backward seek re-renders output up to the target time. The player suits
line-oriented recordings; a recording that was itself a full-screen TUI (vim,
htop) may briefly fight the bar. When output is piped or redirected, playback
runs straight through and
.B \-\-idle
applies; in the player
.B \-\-idle
is ignored \(em use seek instead.
.TP
.B space
Pause or resume.
.TP
.BR "\(-> " "/ " l
Seek forward 5 seconds.
.TP
.BR "\(<- " "/ " h
Seek backward 5 seconds.
.TP
.BR "\(ua " "/ " +
Double the playback speed (up to 64x).
.TP
.BR "\(da " "/ " \-
Halve the playback speed (down to 1/64x).
.TP
.B g
Jump to a recorded command: opens a list of commands detected in the session
(by their shell prompts) with timestamps; select one and press Enter to jump.
Press
.B t
to type a time
.RB ( MM:SS
or seconds) instead, or
.B q
to go back. If no commands are detected, opens the type-a-time prompt directly.
.TP
.B "mouse click"
Click the status bar to seek to that point. Shift+click to select text instead
(mouse reporting otherwise captures the click).
.TP
.B b
Hide or show the transport bar. Hiding releases the reserved bottom row so the
recording plays full-height \(em useful for recordings that draw their own
progress bar (e.g.
.BR apt / dpkg ).
.TP
.B 0
Restart from the beginning.
.TP
.BR q " / " Ctrl-C
Quit.
.SH AUDIT COMMANDS
When the
.B ghostshell-daemon
daemon is installed (it runs as root and collects all users' sessions into
the root-only central store
.IR /var/lib/ghostshell ),
these commands review and watch recordings. They require root, since the
central store is readable only by root.
.TP
.B "ls \-\-all"
List all users that have recordings in the central store and their session
counts.
.TP
.B "ls \-\-user \fIname\fR"
List one user's sessions in the central store.
.RB ( ls\-user
is a hidden backward-compatible alias.)
.TP
.BI "play " sessionid
Replay a central session by id, searched across all users in the central store.
Accepts
.B \-\-speed
and
.BR \-\-idle .
A target that is not an existing local file is auto-detected as a central
session id.
.RB ( play\-user
is a hidden backward-compatible alias.)
.TP
.BI "tail \fR[\fB\-n\fR " "N\fR] " sessionid
Print the last
.I N
output lines of a session (default 20).
.TP
.BI "tail \-f " sessionid
Live-stream an in-progress session from the daemon as it is recorded.
.TP
.B tree
Print a tree of users and their sessions.
.TP
.BI "search " "[\-\-from T] [\-\-to T] [\-\-user U] [\-i] pattern"
Search all recordings for
.IR pattern ,
matching the recorded command and terminal output. Print each matching session
with a few snippet lines.
.B \-\-from
and
.B \-\-to
limit to sessions started in a time range
.RI ( YYYY-MM-DD [
.IR "HH:MM" "] or RFC3339);"
.B \-\-user
limits to one user;
.B \-i
is case-insensitive;
.B \-\-all
lists every session (no pattern needed).
.TP
.BI "export " "[\-o file] [\-\-force] sessionid"
Decrypt a central recording to a plaintext asciinema v2 cast (stdout, or
.IR file
with
.BR \-o )
for offline use or
.BR "asciinema play" .
With
.BR \-o ,
ghostshell refuses to overwrite an existing file unless
.B \-\-force
is given.
.TP
.B prune \fR[\fB\-\-yes\fR]
Interactively delete recordings from the central store. First prints a storage
overview (users, session counts, sizes, total) and requires the prune password
(set on first use, e.g. just after install). Then prompts for the user scope
(all or one user) and the selection (\fBall\fR, \fBdays\fR N for sessions older
than N days, or \fBrange\fR FROM TO), previews matching sessions, and asks for
confirmation. In-progress (active) recordings are never pruned.
.B \-\-yes
skips the final confirmation.
.TP
.B backup
Immediately run the configured backup of the central store. Honors the same
.B backup_type
and
.B backup_target
settings the daemon uses for periodic backups
.RB ( bucket_aws ", " bucket_gcp ", or " rsync ).
.TP
.B "ansible list \fR[\fB\-\-user\fR \fIU\fR]"
List Ansible playbook runs from the central store. With no
.BR \-\-user ,
scans all users. Columns: RUN, PLAYBOOK, CONTROLLER, OK, CHG, FAIL, STARTED, HOSTS.
.TP
.B "ansible show \fR[\fB\-\-user\fR \fIU\fR] \fIrunid\fR"
Show full detail for a playbook run: plays, per-task status (ok/changed/failed/
unreachable/skipped), output for failed or changed tasks, and the PLAY RECAP per host.
.PP
.SS Ansible tracking
.PP
Install the callback plugin on the
.B controller
host (the machine running
.BR ansible-playbook ):
.PP
.RS
.EX
export ANSIBLE_CALLBACK_PLUGINS=/usr/share/ghostshell/ansible
export ANSIBLE_CALLBACKS_ENABLED=ghostshell
ansible-playbook site.yml
.EE
.RE
.PP
Or add to
.IR ansible.cfg :
.PP
.RS
.EX
[defaults]
callback_plugins  = /usr/share/ghostshell/ansible
callbacks_enabled = ghostshell
.EE
.RE
.PP
The plugin spawns
.B ghostshell ansible-ingest
as a subprocess, which streams JSON-lines events to ghostshell-daemon via
.IR /run/ghostshell-daemon.sock .
If ghostshell-daemon is unreachable the run is saved locally to
.IR ~/.local/share/ghostshell/ansible/<runid>.ajsonl
(fail-open; playbook never aborted). Runs stored in the central store are
encrypted at rest with the same AES-256-GCM key used for terminal recordings.
.PP
Limitation: only controllers with ghostshell installed produce Ansible records.
Managed hosts still receive raw Ansible SSH execs (captured by the sshd
ForceCommand wrapper, if configured), but those carry no task name or status.
.PP
Central recordings are encrypted at rest (AES-256-GCM); on disk a
.I .cast
is opaque to
.BR cat / strings / grep .
The audit commands decrypt transparently using the key at
.IR /var/lib/ghostshell/.ghostshell.key .
.PP
When
.B ghostshell-daemon
is running,
.B ghostshell rec
streams to it over
.I /run/ghostshell-daemon.sock
and recordings are stored centrally (root-owned). If the daemon is down,
.B ghostshell rec
falls back to the user-local directory and the daemon ingests those files on
its next startup.
.SH OTHER COMMANDS
.TP
.B "init \fR[\fB\-\-reset\-password\fR|\fB\-\-clear\-password\fR]"
Run the first-time setup wizard (checks config, daemon reachability, encryption
key, and playback-password status).
.B \-\-reset\-password
changes the optional playback password and
.B \-\-clear\-password
removes it; both require the current password first. When a playback password
is set, the read commands
.RB ( play ", " tail ", " tree ", " search ", " export ", " "ls \-\-all" / \-\-user )
prompt for it. The hash is stored in
.I /etc/ghostshell/.playback_passwd
.RB ( root:root " 0600)."
.TP
.B "completion bash"
Print the bash completion script (install to
.IR /usr/share/bash-completion/completions/ghostshell ).
.TP
.B version
Print the program version.
.RB ( \-V " and " \-\-version " are equivalent.)"
.TP
.B \-\-check
Validate
.I /etc/ghostshell/ghostshell.conf
and print all resolved configuration values. Exits 0 on success, 1 on error
(mirrors
.BR "nginx \-t" ).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GHOSTSHELL_DIR
User-local recordings directory. If unset, defaults to
.IR ~/.local/share/ghostshell .
.TP
.B GHOSTSHELL_CENTRAL_DIR
Central root-only store read by the audit commands and written by
.BR ghostshell-daemon .
If unset, defaults to
.IR /var/lib/ghostshell .
.TP
.B GHOSTSHELL_DAEMON_SOCK
Daemon socket path used by
.B ghostshell rec
and the audit commands. If unset, defaults to
.IR /run/ghostshell-daemon.sock .
.TP
.B GHOSTSHELL_QUIET
If set to a non-empty value,
.B ghostshell rec
suppresses its banner and saved-path message.
.TP
.B SHELL
Shell launched by
.B ghostshell rec
when no
.I command
is given. If unset,
.I /bin/bash
is used.
.TP
.B TERM
Recorded in the cast header so players can reproduce terminal behavior.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/ghostshell/
Default store directory (overridden by
.BR GHOSTSHELL_DIR ).
.TP
.I <store>/<YYYYMMDDThhmmss>-<pid>.cast
Auto-named recording. The timestamp is the session start time; the pid
is the recorder's process id.
.TP
.I /etc/ghostshell/ghostshell.conf
Runtime configuration file. All keys are optional; built-in defaults apply when absent.
Override path with
.B GHOSTSHELL_CONFIG
env var. See
.B CONFIGURATION
section or
.I /usr/share/ghostshell/ghostshell.conf.example
for available keys.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B /etc/ghostshell/ghostshell.conf
is a simple key=value file (# comments, blank lines allowed).
Available keys and defaults:
.TP
.B socket_path
Unix socket path for ghostshell-daemon (default: /run/ghostshell-daemon.sock). Env: GHOSTSHELL_DAEMON_SOCK.
.TP
.B central_dir
Root of the central session store (default: /var/lib/ghostshell). Env: GHOSTSHELL_CENTRAL_DIR.
.TP
.B key_file
Encryption key path, relative to central_dir or absolute (default: .ghostshell.key).
.TP
.B dial_timeout_sec
Seconds to wait connecting to ghostshell-daemon (default: 1). Env: GHOSTSHELL_DIAL_TIMEOUT_SEC.
.TP
.B eof_grace_ms
Milliseconds before force-closing PTY on stdin EOF (default: 500). Env: GHOSTSHELL_EOF_GRACE_MS.
.TP
.B ansible_output_cap
Max bytes per ansible task output (default: 8192). Env: GHOSTSHELL_ANSIBLE_OUTPUT_CAP.
.TP
.B scroll_buffer
PTY read buffer size in bytes, minimum 4096 (default: 32768). Env: GHOSTSHELL_SCROLL_BUFFER.
.TP
.B log_level
ghostshell-daemon log verbosity, 0 off through 5 trace (default: 3). Env: GHOSTSHELL_LOG_LEVEL.
.TP
.B log_file
ghostshell-daemon logfile path; empty disables file logging (default: /var/log/ghostshell/ghostshell.log).
Env: GHOSTSHELL_LOG_FILE.
.TP
.B backup_type
Central-store backup mechanism: bucket_aws, bucket_gcp, rsync, or empty to
disable (default: empty). Env: GHOSTSHELL_BACKUP_TYPE.
.TP
.B backup_target
Backup destination, e.g. s3://bucket/prefix, gs://bucket/prefix, or
user@host:/path. Env: GHOSTSHELL_BACKUP_TARGET.
.TP
.B backup_interval_sec
Seconds between periodic daemon backups (default: 0, disabled). Env:
GHOSTSHELL_BACKUP_INTERVAL_SEC.
.SH FILE FORMAT
Recordings use the asciinema v2 cast format: a UTF-8, JSON-lines text
file.
.PP
The first line is a header object, for example:
.PP
.RS
.EX
{"version":2,"width":80,"height":24,"timestamp":1779776263,
 "command":"/bin/bash","env":{"SHELL":"/bin/bash","TERM":"xterm-256color"}}
.EE
.RE
.PP
Each subsequent line is an event array
.RB [ "time, \"o\", data" ]
where
.I time
is seconds (float) since session start,
.B "o"
marks terminal output, and
.I data
is the printed text:
.PP
.RS
.EX
[0.131000, "o", "hello\\r\\n"]
.EE
.RE
.PP
Because the format is standard asciinema v2, files are also viewable
with
.B asciinema cat
and playable with
.BR "asciinema play" .
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Record an interactive shell, then replay it:
.EX
.B $ ghostshell rec
.B $ ghostshell ls
.B $ ghostshell play ~/.local/share/ghostshell/20260526T120422-1858012.cast
.EE
.TP
Record a single command:
.EX
.B $ ghostshell rec /bin/bash -c 'make test'
.EE
.TP
Record to a named file:
.EX
.B $ ghostshell rec -o /tmp/deploy.cast
.EE
.TP
Replay at double speed:
.EX
.B $ ghostshell play --speed 2 session.cast
.EE
.TP
Replay with exact original pauses (no idle cap):
.EX
.B $ ghostshell play --idle 0 session.cast
.EE
.TP
Store recordings in a custom directory:
.EX
.B $ GHOSTSHELL_DIR=/var/log/sessions ghostshell rec
.B $ GHOSTSHELL_DIR=/var/log/sessions ghostshell ls
.EE
.TP
Play with the standard asciinema player, if installed:
.EX
.B $ asciinema play session.cast
.EE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error (e.g.
.B play
given a missing or malformed file, or the recorder could not start the
command).
.PP
.B ghostshell rec
propagates the recorded command's own exit status: if the command exits
non-zero, ghostshell exits with that same code, so scripts that wrap a command in
.B ghostshell rec
observe its real exit code.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (unknown subcommand or bad arguments).
.SH LIMITATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
Records terminal output only; keystrokes (input) are not captured.
.IP \(bu 2
Records only sessions started under
.BR "ghostshell rec" .
The optional login hook and sshd
.B ForceCommand
wrapper (installed by the packages) auto-record logins and remote commands, but
both are fail-open and can be sidestepped by a user who avoids ghostshell.
Non-circumventable capture would require PAM- or kernel-stage hooks, which are
not implemented.
.IP \(bu 2
Not tamper-proof against a malicious user: ghostshell provides root-only audit
visibility, not an enforcement boundary. See the security model in the project
README.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR script (1),
.BR scriptreplay (1),
.BR asciinema (1),
.BR ttyrec (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Part of the Ghost Shell project.
